Good morning everyone.
Welcome to
Using Performance Analysis Tools for
Mac OS X.
Let's dive in.
I'm Dave Payne,
working on the performance tools.
So this morning we're going to cover some
of the concepts of performance analysis,
just general concepts for any system,
and then look at the performance tools
that we have available for Mac OS X,
and then dive into looking at a case
study of real-world use of the tools,
and then showing some of the cool
new work that we've been doing to
integrate some of the features of the
sampler profiling tool into Shark,
which is another profiling tool,
to combine them.
And then add a bunch of powerful new
features to help you find performance
problems faster in your applications.
So why are we interested in this?
After all, those machines are
getting faster and faster,
right?
Just buy beefier hardware.
That's really cool.
Well, there's a lot of jobs no matter
how fast the hardware is.
People always need more power.
You need it in your development tools,
for example, faster compilations, etc.
In general,
I don't want to have to go out
and buy another gigabyte of
RAM to run this application
or these three in combination.
I'd like my laptop to have
the battery last all the way
back to Dallas on my flight.
A lot of that is how much am
I beating on the hardware,
the CPU, the memory.
When the fan kicks in,
what's going on there?
That takes power as well on the laptops.
In general,
we want applications that play
well together with others.
That really is important to reduce
the amount of overall memory
that your application is using.
Because I'm running... I'm
running more and more applications
on my system every day.
You guys are creating cool apps.
Thanks.
But I don't want to have to page
tremendously when I'm switching
between those applications.
So rather than just diving in and saying,
well,
I think this routine is going to be slow.
I want to go rewrite it
because it'll be fun and cool.
Humans are notoriously bad at guessing
where the performance problems might be.
So we need a systematic way
to go about looking at this.
You're the expert in
using your application,
what it's for.
So an approach to performance analysis,
first, define what the major
operations you're interested in
having fast for the user are.
Then,
what are your goals to make sure that
that's nice and fast for the user?
For example, responsiveness.
If you have slow operations,
then you can either speed
those operations up,
which is the best case,
this just happened like that,
or if it's unavailable,
you can speed those operations up.
If it's unavoidable that
it's going to be slow,
then you want the user to be
able to be in control of the
application again quickly.
So maybe move the slow operation
to a separate thread so that
the UI can be responsive again.
Throughput.
If you're doing a game,
you want lots of frames per second.
If you're doing a network application,
you want a lot of data throughput.
Servers,
you want lots of transactions per second.
What's the goal for your arena?
Then, establish precise benchmarks.
For that,
define what your target hardware
for your customer segment is,
what operating system
version you're testing with,
and the specific data that you're
going to be passing in and specifically
what operations you want to test.
Then, add in time measurement code
instrumentation so you can time
and time again measure that same
operation and see how you're doing.
Track that throughout your development.
This is what the Safari team was
doing to make sure that they had
the fastest web browser on Mac OS X.
Define a precise set of benchmarks
and then ran it time and time again.
And when somebody was going to check
in a major piece of new functionality,
it couldn't go in if it caused the
system to slow down noticeably.
So don't allow regressions.
And finally, if you do identify some
performance problems,
then focus your tuning
efforts on those hotspots.
Well, that's easily said,
but how do you actually do that?
How do you find what the hotspots are?
Got tools to help with that?
Yes, absolutely.
We've got tools.
You've got tools.
These have been included with
your Mac OS X performance tools
for several years at this point.
Take a look in Developer Applications
Performance Tools.
As with all of our developer tools,
these tools are free.
We really want you to use these
things to create great applications.
They provide full support for
everything you need to do with Mac OS X,
including now a lot of support has
been added in for Java profiling.
And in addition,
our GUI-based tools are integrated
with Xcode for a full round
trip of the development cycle.
You can launch your binary
under a performance tool.
And then you can get back to the
source code directly from the
performance tool back into Xcode.
So we have a variety of performance tools
for monitoring performance problems,
for analyzing what once you've found
that you do have a performance problem,
then analyzing what is the problem,
where is it, why is it happening
in a variety of areas,
memory use, execution time,
other types of resources.
And I'm going to dive into a bunch
of these tools as we go through.
So in the area of high-level monitoring,
there's a number of things you
can look at to help answer just
what in general is happening.
One of the primary ones
is the command line tool,
Top, which is always there for you.
You can use that for just my system
right now or to look at a headless
server or remotely log into a system.
You can also use that to look
at a full-screen game going.
But we've got a bunch of other tools
as well that are a little bit more
friendly with graphical user interfaces.
So for example,
a nicer user interface to Top is the
activity monitor application that can
help you analyze why is my system slow.
Is there some particular
process that's taking time?
Is its memory growing?
So this one ships on the user CD.
If the user calls up your
support line and says,
"My system's slow." You can
call fire up activity monitor
and tell me what it looks like.
Another one you might
not be familiar with,
this was one of the Chud tools.
We've now elevated it up into the
mainstream set of performance tools.
It's called Big Top.
So this actually takes the
Top information and graphs it over time.
So you can really see how
it's changing over time.
I find this very useful to watch and
actually see graphically is the private
memory use of my application growing.
Or the virtual memory use.
Those are two of the best metrics.
And you may end up,
you don't want to look at shared resident
size because that's like your frameworks
that are shared with other apps.
But the private space could be growing.
And that's important to know.
Oftentimes, I'm sure you've seen it,
the spinning cursor comes up.
And you wonder, dang,
I wish I could capture that.
Maybe it's a two second spin.
And by the time you're off typing
sample on the command line,
the spin's over.
But it makes your app
not feel responsive.
So spin control is a great
way to just capture that.
Just have it running in the
background all the time.
It automatically detects when
applications aren't responding
to the user interface events.
And lets you see what's going on there.
Now, sometimes I mention that
the fan will kick in.
I've noticed this a number of times
that my machine is sitting there idle
and yet suddenly the fan fires up.
Whoa, what's going on there?
So I fire up top or activity
monitor and take a look and some
process is using 50% of the CPU.
Maybe it's drawing too much.
Quartz Debug is a great way to look
at this and I've actually seen this a
number of times in real applications.
It's periodically drawing and Quartz
Debug flashes the graphics yellow
on the screen every time it draws.
Or you can also set it up to
just see duplicate drawing
in just normal operations.
Very useful.
So once you've used the high-level
performance analysis tools to
see what's going on overall,
then now we want to go and dive
into why is this happening.
So we have a variety of profiling tools.
We're going to talk a lot about
Shark today because we've put a lot
of effort into the Shark application.
Spin control, I mentioned.
Thread viewer lets you see the
thread activity of your application.
What are all the different threads
and what are the back traces of them.
And then for those of you doing
OpenGL graphics programming,
OpenGL Profiler is a fantastic
application to help figure out
where the time is going there.
Command line tools,
sample is excellent for just a quick
basic sample process name or process ID,
number of seconds.
Very useful.
And then we have the
Venerable Unix Gprof tool.
But that's the only one that really
requires recompiling for profiling.
The others don't need to do any
recompilation of your application.
So I mentioned Shark.
We have a new version that
was shown yesterday in the
Development Tools Keynote,
Shark 4.0.
This tool helps you figure out why is my
time being spent in some certain place,
where is it going.
You can look at specific threads,
specific processes, the overall system,
and now you can actually do
sampling over the network as well.
For, again,
like dual full-screen games or something.
This captures all the
information about the system,
both user space and kernel space.
There's a full session on
Shark this Friday afternoon.
I'd encourage you to go to that.
We'll see more of this today,
but we aren't going to dive into
all the full-blown features of it.
One of the things I really love
about Shark is I don't even have
to attach to a process with this.
It's always sitting in the background
with an option escape hotkey that
will sample the entire system.
So if I notice something
seeming sluggish,
I can just hit option escape right away.
Shark fires up and says, "Okay,
let's sample," and then I can option
escape to stop it and see what's
going on in the system and then
dive into that specific process.
But there's a lot of ways to get
more specific information here.
Different sampling methods,
memory tracing, function tracing,
we'll look at a lot of these.
There's three primary views in Shark.
A profile view that lets
you see a top-down view.
you see a top-down call
tree of your function calls.
Bottom up for real profiling information
and who's calling the leaf functions.
We've done a lot of work in this
to really let you hone in and
do filtering and data mining to
simplify the complex picture.
There's a chart view that helps
you really see the patterns
of execution of your code.
This is excellent for both performance
analysis and just understanding
what's going on in your application.
It's really cool.
And finally, within Shark itself,
there's a code browser that you
can see source code or assembly,
get hints about what
the assembly code is,
and get directly back to the
offending lines of code in Xcode.
These are all instrumented
here with specific lines of
code the time is going into.
So I haven't talked a lot about Sampler.
So many of you may be
familiar with using Sampler.
What's going on with that?
We've integrated all of the features
of Sampler into Shark and we plan
to remove Sampler from the system.
So you can see here that Shark has
a number of additional features
and we'll touch on some of
these and then more on Friday.
But please try Shark and
the team's been very busy.
So Shark is there on your Tiger CDs,
but there's actually a newer public
beta that's got a number of additional
features that the team banged
in in the last couple of weeks.
So please download the
new version of Shark.
It runs on both Panther and
Tiger and send us your feedback.
I'll give an address later.
So what about memory use?
I mentioned that it's really important
to try to minimize the overall
footprint of your application.
We have a number of tools to help
analyze what's going on with memory use.
So, a very nice one is ObjectAlloc.
This is great for looking
at dynamic memory use,
both how much memory am I using right
now and how much was the peak that
I used in some particular operation.
You can use this with Cocoa applications
and this is great for seeing your
allocations by allocation type.
What type of objects, so Cocoa objects,
core foundation objects like you would
also have with Carbon applications,
and just general malloc allocations and
it says what size they are because a
lot of times you'll allocate specific
sizes at specific points in your code.
So you can see all that.
And you can look at information
about specific instances of that.
It's not quite as good for
pinning down precise memory leaks.
MallocDebug is still the
best application for that.
This shows a full call tree
of all the allocated memory,
not by type, and it's not so good
for dynamic allocation.
But it is still the best tool for leaks.
There's a command line tool equivalent
of this called leaks that can also show
you the backtraces of where allocations
were occurring if you set this malloc
stack logging environment variable.
So another major function of
MallocDebug was to help find
corrupt memory operations.
But we actually have a better
solution for that at this point.
The purpose was to help crash
your application if you did
something bad with memory.
But really,
you want to be operating within a
debugging environment if this happens.
So we have a new Malloc debugging
library called GuardMalloc.
So this operates within the
context of the Xcode debugger.
There's a nice switch on the
debugger menu item now to say "Enable
GuardMalloc." And what this does when you
turn it on is every allocation you make
goes onto a separate virtual memory page.
Then the end of the buffer is lined
up with the end of that memory page,
and the next page is non-allocating.
So if you overrun the buffer,
you'll crash immediately,
and you're in the Xcode debugger,
you can see immediately where
buffer overruns are in your code.
If you free the block,
then we free the virtual memory page.
And so if you go and read or write
from that page again after freeing it,
then again, you crash immediately.
So this is a great way to find
really nasty memory problems.
So you can learn more about
this in the Xcode debugging
session on Thursday morning
and the libgmallocman page.
So not so much a performance tool,
but a great solution.
So again, I've said we're putting a
lot of effort into Shark.
We're trying to add a number
of these memory analysis
features into Shark as well.
Shark can now do malloc allocation
sampling and show you the size of
your allocations and call trees there.
There are still different strengths and
weaknesses of our memory analysis tools.
Again,
objectalloc is great for dynamic analysis
and looking at specific object types.
Malloc debug is good for leaks,
and we want to add leaks
detection into Shark,
but Shark has new capabilities too.
So that's it for a broad brush
overview of the performance tools.
Now let's dive into a
specific case study.
Now I'm not actually going to do
the requisite planetary motion
simulator that seems to be so popular.
I'm going to be looking at an
application called Disk Inventory X.
This is an open source application.
It's kind of cool and
actually kind of useful.
It uses a concept from Ben Schneiderman
at the University of Maryland for
representing hierarchical information
in a compact two-dimensional space.
So it's an open source application,
GPL'd.
I'll be sending changes
back to the author.
He's pretty excited about that.
And as we go through,
we'll be looking at a number of
areas of what might be slow here:
time, memory, other resource use.
So in your application,
as you look at something like this,
what might you want to look at?
Of course, major operations.
How long does it take to
open a large document?
If the application is idle, again,
you should be taking 0% of the CPU.
And again,
watch for UI spins and deal with those.
Memory size,
I've talked about the importance
of looking at dynamic memory use.
We'll see that.
Leaks.
One thing that may not be
obvious is auto-released
objects with Cocoa applications.
If you create a separate memory,
you'll have to look at the memory size.
If you create a separate thread,
or if you have a foundation-based tool,
it's real easy with a lot
of the Cocoa APIs to end up
creating an auto-released object,
but maybe not getting back and freeing
the auto-release pool very frequently.
Maybe it's a long-running thread,
and those objects just
build up and get paged out,
and that can take-- I've actually seen
applications crash due to this problem.
The system gets slow, you crash.
So also look at disk
and network activity.
I'm going to be specifically
looking at some of this with
our sample application here.
So what I want to do is switch
to--oops--we'll switch to demo one here.
So this is the disk
inventory application.
What we've done here is-- actually,
we can't see the menu bar up there.
If we can get the menu bar,
that'd be great.
So what we've done is taken a look
at our applications directory that's
got 1.9 gigabytes of space in it.
And I'm interested in
where is that space going?
So what this application
does is graphically show
me the size of the files.
The larger the rectangle,
the bigger the file.
And the color represents
what kind of file it is.
So we can see the blue is a disk image.
So wow,
I have at least one big file here.
OK, that looks like the
Adobe Photoshop 7 disk image.
I probably don't need that.
Down here, a couple other disk images,
application packages.
So this is kind of cool.
I can click on a directory and see how
much space that directory is taking.
I can move around with the
mouse and see things there.
So it's actually kind of useful.
So let's go ahead and quit
out of this and bring up the
Performance Tools folder.
I'm going to launch the
Big Top tool that I referred to,
and I'm also going to
launch Spin Control.
I'll just put Spin Control down
here in the background.
Now, with Big Top,
I can look at things like the CPU usage.
As I move a window around,
we can see that CPU use goes up and down,
as expected.
Let's go ahead and launch the
Disk Inventory application again.
I'm going to look at the,
specifically the disk inventory
process and watch the memory
size of that as I go through and,
so what I'm doing is going to open
recent and actually reopening the
applications window there and scrolling,
analyzing that.
So you can see that memory
use is climbing here.
I've added a little instrumentation
window here and it took a little bit
of time to analyze that 1.9 gigabytes.
So that took about 9 seconds
to scan that folder and a
little less than a second here,
so about 10 seconds to look at this.
Actually I haven't tried this
operation on this machine.
We can also show package contents and
Note that we actually caught a
little spin here as well with
Spin Control at this point.
So it took about four seconds
to show the package contents.
And with the spin,
I can come down here and select
that and show a text report and just
see what was happening in there.
So we were making a bunch of recursive
calls to determine the file kinds inside
of this package that I'm looking at.
So that's interesting.
So we saw the memory use climb.
That's not totally surprising
because we were building up data
structures to represent this.
But we should look at that and see
if we're as efficient as we could be.
Let's look at one other thing.
If I resize this window here,
notice a slight pause before redrawing.
And that was interesting
with the memory use.
A little spike there, actually.
That looks like it was probably
over about a megabyte of
dynamic memory creation while
I was resizing that window.
So maybe that dynamic memory creation
was a little bit more efficient.
But I think that the duration and
deletion has something to do with
why it's not as fast as it could be.
So let's go back to slides.
So when we tested this,
we don't have such beefy
hardware in the labs.
We have mere mortal dual G5s.
So my results on testing this
same directory in the lab was
a little slower than that.
It was actually almost 20
seconds for scanning the folder
and getting the file sizes,
and about 10 seconds actually
to classify the file kinds.
And showing the package contents was
again pretty consistent there at about 4
seconds for a total of almost 33 seconds
to scan not quite 2 gigabytes of space.
There's a lot of 80 gigabyte disks out
there on your personal computer systems.
So what, 20 minutes to scan my disk?
What if I have a terabyte disk farm
and I want to use this technique?
That could be nasty.
Maybe we can speed this up.
Now, I've often heard the question of
what are the best timing APIs for
instrumentation on the system?
So, Mach Absolute Time is a
Mach API that's the fundamental call.
This goes down in and reads the
time-based register out of the CPU.
There's a number of other different
APIs that you can use for different,
you know,
depending on what's convenient for you.
Like Get Time of Day is a nice
portable API in the Unix environment.
These all end up calling
down into Mach Absolute Time.
This is the way, the actual code that
I used in this application.
So I simply call Mac Absolute Time,
say get time,
gives me a 64-bit value back.
I guess I could just recall it,
call it directly.
Then I, in subtract time,
once I have two of these,
I just subtract them and
apply a conversion to get me
a double value that's seconds,
makes it easy to print.
So with that,
I've identified that we have some issues.
I'd like to bring on one of our experts
in analyzing these issues and also then
creating tools to help do this process.
So it's my pleasure to
introduce Christy Warren.
[Transcript missing]
So going back to this picture,
we're going to zoom in on this graph.
And it's not just complexity
at the high level.
Look at it as you zoom
in to the finest detail.
You see repetition on
many different levels.
It's like a fractal,
like in a Mandelbrot set.
You see coarse,
grand detail and then finer
structure as you zoom in.
It's amazing what we run into with
software and processors today.
It's just incredible.
So to analyze performance,
I've come up with a
sort of simple formula.
The impact of any operation you
do is equal to the cost of that
operation times the number of
places it's used in your code.
So like in the Dave and
me quicksort example,
there's two uses of
it that are redundant,
so that makes it twice as
expensive as it needs to be.
Now traditional profilers make it
really easy to understand cost.
You know, you sample a program,
you see all the leaf functions
that you spend time in.
But it's hard to see use,
because these are complex
patterns of usage that often
go through not just my library,
but ten of your libraries
scattered throughout the system.
So to help us analyze use,
we have two techniques available to us.
One is called Call Stack Data Mining.
And this is a new functionality
that we're introducing.
We're not aware of this being
available elsewhere in other programs.
And the idea here is you can strip away
the stuff that you don't want to see
and focus on what you really care about.
I'll describe that more in a second.
The other approach is
this graphical analysis.
The idea here is you visualize
your execution trace,
as I've shown.
And it turns out there's a technique
called software fingerprinting.
Where, when you see similar
patterns on the picture,
they would mean that you're
going through the same code path.
And if there's repeated
patterns that are the same,
like heartbeats on an EKG,
that means you're going
through the same code path ten,
a hundred, or a thousand,
or a million times.
And it's at least worth looking
to make sure that you aren't
just doing it on the same data.
You're going to be looking at the
same data over and over again.
Or even if you are doing
it on different data,
can you hoist things out?
Like in a quick draw,
I mean a quick sort, sorry,
each time you do a compare,
the compare may go through a
whole bunch of layers of objects.
You know, a whole bunch of overhead
that has nothing to do with,
you know, just comparing two values.
So remove that stuff.
Pull it outside of the
iterative structure,
and your program will run a lot faster.
But with this tool,
you'll be able to see these things.
You know,
they'll shout out at you things that
you'd either have to go digging through
code and spend countless hours on.
countless hours trying to find the
problem if you didn't have these tools.
This is working?
So data mining concepts.
So I talked about stripping
away what you don't want.
Now, I have a question for you.
How many of you have profiled your
program and seen not your code,
but like countless system files,
system frameworks?
Isn't that stuff annoying?
Some of you?
A lot of you?
Yeah.
I mean, when I first used a profile,
that was the first problem I ran
into when I was new at this.
And it was like, well, what good is this?
I can't do anything about C-Live.
I can't do anything about AppKit.
I can only do things on my own program.
So wouldn't it be great to have a
button that goes-- you push this button,
and all that stuff goes away,
and you see your functions as the leaves,
and the charge-- the cost of the
system libraries all ascribed to
various functions in your code.
Wouldn't that be a lot better?
I mean, I find that really useful.
And that's a very coarse operation.
If you want to do finer-grained stuff,
you could strip away one library.
Now,
let's say you have any work that you're
working with the AppKit team or the
Foundation team and say-- so you want
to see details in those libraries,
but you want to get
rid of the low levels.
So you want to get rid
of core foundation.
You want to get rid of standard lib.
Exclude by library lets you strip out
a particular library in the trace.
And this is all non-destructive.
It gives you a different view on it.
And you get rid of those libraries,
and it charges the cost up.
So by transforming the data,
you can focus in on the
hotspots that you care about.
This idea of flattened library.
Instead of just completely
limiting a library,
you can flatten it to its entry points.
So you can see where your code is
only calling into these libraries.
We don't see all the details of how, say,
CFDictionary is implemented,
because you don't care about that.
You just care that I'm calling
CFDictionary get value.
So, to help you see what you want,
use the thing Focus Symbol.
In Focus Symbol,
you choose a particular call
tree that you want to look at.
And when you do that,
you strip away everything that's
above it or to the sides of it.
So, I just told you a lot,
and it's kind of thick,
so I'm going to give you some
pictures to help illustrate this.
So, here we have a main,
and it calls an init function, you know,
do example, which does your work,
and some cleanup.
And then you have this bar function
that's called four times by,
you know, our function.
In real programming,
it's probably more like a
hundred or a thousand times,
but I made it simple here.
And this, in turn, calls core foundation,
and it's using a CFDictionary get value.
Now, if I just profile this,
I'll see functions mostly
from these ones in yellow.
These are leaf functions,
and they'll be far removed
from what you care about.
So, if we do the exclude library,
those go away,
and now bar becomes our leaf function.
So, by doing that operation now,
instead of seeing these things are
removed from what we care about,
we're in what we care about.
So now, Flatten Library is similar.
Let's go through this quickly.
But it replaces the library
with the entry point.
Focus.
Do example.
Strip those away.
And boom.
So by doing these transformations,
you can manipulate your qualities.
And this is also really cool
because you can make really
good performance arguments.
When you strip these things away,
you're no longer trying to
point out something here,
something there, something there,
and maybe it makes sense.
You actually see the counts
and the places that matter.
And you can make really good
arguments to other people that
we need to work on this stuff.
We need to fix it.
So with that, let's go do a little demo.
Bye now.
We're going to launch our application,
and we're going to launch Shark.
Now, how many of you have used
some version of Shark before?
So about most of you?
So this is Shark 4.
And you're going to see a lot
more of it in the Shark session
later this week on Friday at 3:30.
But you're going to get
a little preview today.
The UI is a little bit different.
The original Shark was a
time-based sampler that lets
you sample the entire system.
That's really cool.
It's good to have it around
in the background and whatnot.
But in this case,
we want to focus on particular processes.
And there's a number of
different things we can do.
We can trace memory allocations,
function traces.
We can trace various
Java things if you do Java.
And for this application,
we're going to use what's
called a sampler time profile.
We choose this because the program
uses file system operations.
And this involves a lot
of waiting on the kernel.
And this trace does the best
job of attributing those
costs to the user calls.
So let's go over to our application.
.
And do Open Recent.
And Shark gives you this
Option Escape hotkey,
which is really handy.
So I'm in the middle
of the UI manipulating,
and I can hit Option Escape and do Start.
So we're going to start our scan.
And this stops every thread
and records a sample,
whether it's doing something or
it's waiting on a kernel call.
Now that it's done, we stop.
And we have a heavy view.
This is a view of all the leaf functions,
as I've been talking about,
and the relative percentage
of the counts that we're in.
So we click on this
syscall thread switch,
and on the right here,
this is one of the nice new features,
is you can see a backtrace
of that particular similar.
So we see that we're
in a heartbeat thread.
Well, that's not very interesting.
It's sleeping, sleeping until date.
So in this case,
let's get rid of that thread.
So we're going to go down to
the thread pop-up here and
choose one of the threads.
And it's going to give us the
one that we're interested in.
So the topmost function
here is get adder list.
And this gives you a very
large call stack to look at.
Now,
to help us navigate things a little bit,
there's a nice little thing over
here called color by library.
And when you click that,
some of you may remember
this from Sampler.
That feature was in there.
And now we see that we've colored
things by different colors.
So lib system is lavender,
comp page is red,
disk inventory is brown.
And this just helps us make a
little more sense of it visually
without spending a lot of time.
Let me make this a little bigger.
So we click on Get Adder List.
We see that, yes, we're in user code.
This fsitem load childs is our own thing.
But let's use the exclude
library operation.
We're going to exclude libsystembdlib.
And when that happens,
that goes away and we see that a fair
amount of time is spent in CarbonCore.
So we're going to do this again.
We're going to exclude
library CarbonCore.
And we'll do this a few more times.
So there,
one piece of user code comes up.
Let's do core foundation
and launch services.
And you see that this FS item load
properties and this load child
are all floating up as pretty
major players in this profile.
Before we go in and look at
those in a little more detail,
let's go over to the heavy and tree view.
This is another new feature in Shark.
It lets you see both the
heavy and the tree view,
the top-down view, simultaneously.
So in the top-down view,
we start at the start of our program,
kind of like that diagram I showed you.
And you walk down through your
program until you get to our code.
But there's still a problem.
You've probably seen this before, too,
that there are all these app kit calls.
There's all these system calls that
makes it kind of hard to look around.
If you expand one of these trees,
the outline will be awfully
big and hard to keep track of.
So we're in luck.
There's a button over here
called Flatten System Libraries,
which does that flatten operation
in all the system libraries.
And when we do that now,
This guy simplifies,
and it's a lot more manageable.
There's only a few layers of these calls,
so it gives us context.
You could also exclude
them if you wanted to.
But in this case,
I just thought it was useful to
help me keep track of where I was.
But then we'll notice another problem,
which is we just expanded
this recursive call to load.
This is a file system application,
so it's very natural to write
it in a recursive style.
But if any of you have tried to analyze
performance on a recursive function,
it's rather difficult.
Because at each layer of the recursion,
you may call out to a branch function.
And each of them individually will show
up as relatively small contributors.
But there's no way to kind of
gather them together and focus them.
So for example,
this FS item path shows up as 0.1% here,
0.1% here at different levels.
But it's kind of hard to determine
if that means anything or not.
But luckily, there's another option here
called flatten recursion.
We click on that and look what happens.
LoadChild becomes a single
thing and look at that.
A knit with name parent suddenly
pops up to 43% of the overall time.
So by using this data mining,
we're getting past the
obstacles and getting to the
parts that are interesting.
And by the way, with the Shark 4 download
that Dave mentioned,
there's actually a nice tutorial
that you can go through that will
walk you through these things.
You don't have to remember
everything I'm going through today.
So let's double click on
a knit name with parent.
and Pray to the Demo Gods.
There we go.
So this shows you source now,
annotated with percentages of time.
Those of you who've seen
Shark have seen this before.
But there's a couple new
things that are really cool.
You notice that various
symbols are underlined.
So that means you can follow that link,
just like in a web browser.
So if we double-click
on self-load properties,
which is our heaviest line,
we go to another source file.
And you can navigate forward and back.
And this way you can move around
and explore your performance problem
in a way that's much more concrete,
at least it is to me.
I mean,
isn't it better to deal with source than
to deal with these trees of symbols?
So I found this really a nice feature.
So now we can look at our problem.
This class is an FS item.
Even its name suggests that it's
something you do on every file
system item that you encounter as you
iterate through these directories.
And if you look at the details here,
it does an fs_path_make_ref.
It does file attributes at path.
It does fs_get_catalog_info.
So there's a bunch of these.
It's only about five operations.
And if I look elsewhere,
there'd be even a sixth
operation that we're doing for
every file in the directory.
Now, Dave, there are bulk file system
operations that we support.
They're really cool.
And you can reduce this from
doing this for every file to just
doing it for every directory.
And this should give you
a really nice speedup.
So please consider using that, you know,
in optimizing your program.
So while Dave's off working on that,
I'm going to show you
some function tracing.
You know,
I just showed you data mining and how to
analyze your program using data mining.
Now I'm going to show
you graphical analysis.
You know, using this feature
called function tracing,
you can specify a list of functions
that will let you do an exact trace
of the functions that are called.
So I can choose function trace,
and there's some presets down here.
And you can also enter your own if you
have a set that you particularly like.
So I'm going to do file I/O.
And this gives you a list
of file I/O functions.
It's a little bit hard to read,
but these are just the
standard Unix file calls.
And I already made a preset
here called file I/O.
So we're going to choose that.
And go back to our program.
Open recent.
Start recording.
And this time... Oh.
Okay, we'll just have to do this again.
That's the nice thing about
Shark is it's pretty forgiving.
So we've-- and when
you do an exact trace,
you want to do it for a
relatively short time,
or you might wind up with hundreds of
thousands or even millions of samples.
Even in that short time,
we got 60,000 samples.
And this is kind of a cool view.
You get a distribution of different
file system calls and the percentage
of time that you've used them.
So it gives you a hint of
what your program is doing.
But there's an even better
thing we can look at here.
Let's go to the chart.
And in the chart here--
let me do one thing.
So I get selections out of the way.
Here in the chart,
you see that there's this
kind of wavy pattern.
And let's just zoom into it a little bit,
like here.
And this is a new feature.
This is a really nice zoom control.
As you drag along,
you can zoom in and out,
just like we did in that movie.
That movie wasn't fake.
It was just filmed from
the actual live program.
So we go in here,
and we see this thing that looks
like we're iterating over files.
It's kind of different levels.
If you look in a finder outline view,
you'll see that it's a
similar kind of pattern.
And you'll see that load child
shows up in the stack here.
So let's just do flatten recursion.
And look what it does,
is it completely flattens out our trace.
And we come down here and
we find a fingerprint.
This little shape here is very redundant.
It occurs over and over again,
even in this little thing.
And that happens to be in load child,
a knit name with parent,
and then load properties.
So we found our culprit with
graphical analysis very quickly.
So use both techniques.
If you have an idea of what
functions are expensive already,
you can do a function trace.
You know, if you need to figure out
what areas are expensive,
do time tracing and use
call stack data mining.
Okay, back to you, Dave.
Okay, praying to the audio gods.
Excellent, excellent.
Good job, thanks.
Okay, moving on.
So I did my homework while
Christy was speaking.
And what I've learned here,
I studied the app.
In each directory,
we're making a directory
contents at path call to say,
enumerate all the files and
folders in this directory.
Then for each one of those items,
let's go through and do a number
of things to gather the information
that the program wants to display.
So again, I'm getting an FS ref for
each item so that I can make
additional calls with that.
I want to know whether it's a folder
or a file or a symlink because
I don't want to navigate the symlink
to duplicate the representation
of the space taken by the file.
So I make an attributes
at path call on that.
I want to get the file sizes,
so the data fork and the resource fork,
and also the parent ID to see
if I'm on the same volume.
I don't want to walk off
to multiple volumes here.
So I'm making a FS get
catalog info call on that.
And finally,
when it's doing that classifying files,
it's saying I want to get the kind
string as represented in the finder.
So if it's a .nib file,
we want to show that as
interface builder document.
So for each FS ref,
we end up calling down to launch services
saying get me the kind string for this.
And then we're going to
call the FS ref this file.
So having done my homework,
I did learn about the FS get
catalog info bulk call.
So what this does is it's optimized.
I can say for X number of files,
I can specify how many
I want in a given directory.
I'm looking for a set
of information here.
I want to get the bit that says
is it a directory or is it a file.
I want to get the parent directory ID.
I want to get the directory ID.
I want to get the resource
and data fork sizes.
I want to get the type
and creator information.
And we'll see what I'll do
with that in the next slide.
And then I want to get just the full
array of FS refs for all the individual
items and the full array of entry names.
So I get arrays of all this
from one call that before I was
making lots of file system calls.
So in the classifying files, so again,
what we were doing was hitting the
file system once for each file to say,
give me the kind name for this.
And then the way the code was written,
it's actually storing that kind string
for each individual different file.
But if we step back and think about it,
I just don't have that many
different kinds of files.
And I really don't
need to query the file,
you know, about the specific file.
What I care about is the kind.
And the information that
specifies the kind is the type,
the creator and the extension.
So I can build a dictionary
to map this triplet of type,
creator,
extension to the file name kind string.
So I actually put all of those into
a string and just make it unique,
use that as a key into an
NSDictionary to do a lookup.
Now,
if I don't find it in the cache there,
I can make a different
launch services call to say,
given this triplet of information,
look up the kind string for that.
Now,
that's not even hitting the file system,
right?
So I'm going down from an order.
I'm going down from an operation
here for once for each file down
to zero file system accesses.
And I'm also only storing the kind
string for each different kind,
not once per file.
So I'm also significantly
reducing my memory use.
So before I show the results,
let's see if there's anything
else that we can determine
from the application here.
So let's do a memory analysis demo.
So let's go ahead and quit out of the app
and bring up our performance tools again.
So let me also point out Shark is
now up here in the performance tools.
It used to be down in the chud folder.
Now it's really going mainstream here.
So let's look at ObjectAlloc, though.
So we double click on that.
What we do here is we launch our target
application from within ObjectAlloc,
because it needs to set up
some of the environment for it.
So with this, I simply hit Go.
And what I want is to
keep the backtraces.
I could keep reference counts on objects,
but I don't need that in this situation.
So it goes ahead and launches the app.
Hasn't done too much yet.
I'm going to change the scale here,
because I might have a lot of objects.
And we'll see that this
application is doing live updates.
Let's go ahead and walk
that folder hierarchy again.
As we go through,
we see-- let's do an auto sort.
We see that we're building
up a lot of CFStrings.
These are currently allocated items.
We're building up a lot of FS items.
Now those make sense, kind of.
FS item, I'm getting one for
each file system item.
The CFString is actually the name
for that particular file system item,
so that's being stored.
So that's kind of useful.
I can see the peak amount,
how many has been the peak of
any particular type that I had,
and I can see the total amount.
And you saw again,
live update and auto sorting.
So if I go to total,
this is really interesting.
We see the different
colors of the bars here.
What the red bars indicate,
as opposed to blue,
is the percentage of objects
that you have left remaining.
What's the current number of objects
versus the total you've allocated?
Red means that you have less
than 10% of them remaining,
so maybe you've got a dynamic
memory issue there of creating more
of them than you actually need.
Yellow means, I believe,
it's 25% or a third.
So the bright color indicates the
number that's currently allocated,
so we can see that we have
a lot of CFStrings still.
We had a little bit more peak,
and we had more total that we got rid of.
But what's this NSPath store?
We can see that we've
got 24 of them left,
but we allocated 180,000 of
them in going through this.
What's up with that?
I can actually double-click
on this and get an allocation
chart and see what the dynamic
allocation pattern looked like here.
So it kind of looks almost like this
might have been walking the file system
hierarchy and we're doing something here.
It looks similar to some of the
patterns that Christy showed in Sampler.
I can go in and look at specific
instances of these objects.
And where they're allocated
and what the contents are,
we can see this is Twitter library fonts,
another path there.
I can look at call stacks,
go down through,
descend the maximum path.
Another thing I can do is I can
set a mark and say I'm only
interested in seeing the number
of objects since the mark.
If I do the show package contents,
we see that I can just watch
how many objects are created
during that operation there.
So you can get a lot of information
about your application here through this.
What I want to do here is go
back in and look at-- now,
you'll notice that it actually took a lot
longer to run under Object Alloc because
of the amount of time it was taking.
So don't do time analysis
while you're doing this.
But let's go back in and do
some memory analysis with Shark.
So I'm going to switch to the
MallocTrace operation and start
up Disk Inventory again and
select the Disk Inventory process.
So going back to disk inventory,
let's now--
Look at apps once again.
And like Christy did,
I'll start the sampling and stop it.
And I'm actually going
to jump directly-- well,
that's right.
First off, I wanted to show that
with the value here,
if I switch to value,
you can actually see in the call
tree the amount of memory that was
allocated by the various calls here.
And I could exclude everything that
I don't have source code for and get
down to just seeing the stuff that I do
and where that allocation is going.
So that's fairly interesting.
Let's go directly over to the chart view.
Remove the exclude no source.
And we can see from the chart
here that again this looks like
we have some interesting patterns.
So let's just click on one
of these and that might be
potentially interesting there.
Let's zoom in a little bit,
see what we might see.
Zoom, zoom, zoom.
Interesting little
sawtooth patterns here.
So if I click on this,
we see a number of different
allocations of paths,
and I can just use the
cursor keys to move through.
So it looks like, in fact, from the code,
As I'm walking down through
the file system hierarchy,
the way the code was written was
that when I got to each FS item,
it was making several calls to say,
"Well, I need to know the path right
here." I'm being a good citizen
for memory and I'm not storing
the full path with each object.
That would be overkill.
That's too much memory use.
So I'll dynamically ask for it.
So I'll get my path by asking
what my parent folder is and
then appending my name to it.
But my parent says, "Well,
what's my name?" Let me ask my parent
and then append my name to that.
And up we go.
So that's dynamically creating
lots of auto-released NSPath store
to string objects with Cocoa.
And then the next thing that we see
happening is then we spend a bunch
of time actually auto-releasing that.
We can see the auto-release time there.
So you can see the impact
of too much memory use.
So since I'm recursively descending
down through the file system,
I should be able to, at each level, say,
well,
this is the path that I'm currently at.
And when I go down into the
next directory level deeper,
just append the path part to
that and pass that down through.
I don't have to recursively go
back up every file system item.
So that significantly reduced
the amount of memory we're using.
So now let's go back through and say, OK,
that's all good.
Did we have any results?
Well, I was busy coding away and
slapped a new binary up here.
So let me dynamically
enable some optimizations.
And let's try it again.
So off we go.
Boom.
OK, so what are my test results here?
The folder scanning that before
took over 10 seconds in this case,
about 9 seconds before,
is now a little less than 2 seconds.
Remember this is from vastly reducing
the number of file system operations.
The classifying files that
again was asking for the file
kind string for each file,
that's down to virtually instantaneous
because you'll remember I'm doing
no file system calls there now.
And if I do this show
package contents operation,
boom again, 0.16 whereas before it
was about 4 seconds.
So we can see that we've
significantly reduced the amount
of time the program is taking.
Let's switch back to slides please.
So to summarize,
what the tools helped me do is figure out
that I should use bulk file system calls,
and there's documentation about this.
I actually copied much of the code
from the performance documentation.
I used caching of the file kind
strings so I could just do rapid
lookups and not query the file system.
That helps me reduce my storage
for the file kind strings.
I talked about reducing the
dynamic creation of the path
strings as we go through.
And then as you go through, you know,
optimization is an iterative process,
right?
You've got a hotspot, so you go in,
you tune that, you make that faster,
and now you've got a different hotspot.
So it was actually interesting
to discover that once we made the
file system accesses a lot faster,
that the way it was updating the UI for
feedback about what it was doing,
display this path, display this path,
display this path,
was actually starting to take place.
And it took a fair amount of time.
And so I just display fewer paths because
all you want to know is where you are.
And so that made things faster
also because that's not an
important part of my process here.
So we made significant improvement here.
This is the measurements
I got in the lab,
again, on somewhat slower hardware.
We ended up making the file system
traversal seven times faster.
Classifying file kinds, you know,
depends on the size of your file system.
But that's like infinitely faster.
Much faster showing file
contents for a total of,
call it, ten times faster.
So now this starts to get to be
a more useful application for me.
So we've covered a lot
of things here today,
a lot of tools, a lot of techniques.
We have a lot of documentation about
this on the system for both of these.
Plus the tools have documentation
in them and with them.
There's man pages for
the command line tools.
And so in conclusion,
we've seen we have some powerful tools
that help you both monitor to see if
you've got performance problems and
then analyze what the problems are.
We've put a lot of work into Shark,
working with Nathan and Sanjay,
doing a very collaborative effort
here to try to improve both the power,
add more new features,
but make it easier to approach
and understand at the same time.
So we need to know how we're doing.
You know, does this work for you?
If I remove sampler from the systems,
is that going to cause you a problem?
So download the beta.
Please send us your feedback.
So I'm going to bring
Xavier Legros on stage,
who's our Mac OS X technology
evangelist for this.
This is a feedback list that
you can send information,
feedback about this too.